[Merged by Bors] - Add demo data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark (#144)
stackabletech/stackablectl: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/demos/data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark.adoc

= data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark

[WARNING]
====
This demos uses significant amount of resources. It will most likely not run on your workstation.

> It was developed and tested on 10 nodes with 4 cores (8 threads), 20GB RAM and 30GB hdd disks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was developed and tested on 10 nodes with each 4 cores (8 threads), 20GB RAM and 30GB HDD.
```

> Additionally persistent volumes with a total size of approx. 1TB will get created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, persistent volumes with a total size of approximately 1TB will get created.
```

A smaller version of this demo might be created in the future.
====

[NOTE]
====

> This guide assumes you already have the demo `data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark` installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide assumes that you already have the demo `data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark` installed.
```

If you don't have it installed please follow the xref:commands/demo.adoc#_install_demo[documentation on how to install a demo].
To put it simply you have to run `stackablectl demo install data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark`.
====

This demo will

* Install the required Stackable operators
* Spin up the following data products
** *Trino*: A fast distributed SQL query engine for big data analytics that helps you explore your data universe. This demo uses it to enable SQL access to the data
** *Spark*: A multi-language engine for executing data engineering, data science, and machine learning. This demo uses it to stream data from Kafka into the warehouse
** *MinIO*: A S3 compatible object store. This demo uses it as persistent storage to store all the data used

> ** *Kafka*:  A distributed event streaming platform for high-performance data pipelines, streaming analytics and data integration. This demos uses it as an event streaming platform to stream the data in near real-time
> ** *NiFi*:  An easy-to-use, powerful system to process and distribute data. This demos uses it to fetch multiple online real-time datasources and ingest it into Kafka

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** *Kafka*: A distributed event streaming platform for high-performance data pipelines, streaming analytics and data integration. This demos uses it as an event streaming platform to stream the data in near real-time
** *NiFi*: An easy-to-use, powerful system to process and distribute data. This demos uses it to fetch multiple online real-time data sources and ingest it into Kafka
```

** *Hive metastore*: A service that stores metadata related to Apache Hive and other services. This demo uses it as metadata storage for Trino and Spark

> ** *Open policy agent* (OPA): A open source, general-purpose policy engine that unifies policy enforcement across the stack. This demo uses it as the authorizer for Trino, which decides which user is able to query which data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** *Open policy agent* (OPA): An open source, general-purpose policy engine that unifies policy enforcement across the stack. This demo uses it as the authorizer for Trino, which decides which user is able to query which data.
```

** *Superset*: A modern data exploration and visualization platform. This demo utilizes Superset to retrieve data from Trino via SQL queries and build dashboards on top of that data

> * Copy multiple datasources in csv and parquet format into the s3 staging area

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Copy multiple data sources in CSV and Parquet format into the S3 staging area
```

* Let Trino copy the data from staging area into the warehouse area. During the copy transformations such as validating, casting, parsing timestamps and enriching the data by joining lookup-tables are done

> * Simultaneously start a NiFi workflow, which fetches real-time datasets via the internet and ingests the data as json records into Kafka

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Simultaneously start a NiFi workflow, which fetches datasets in real-time via the internet and ingests the data as JSON records into Kafka
```

* Spark structured streaming job is started, which streams the data out of Kafka into the warehouse
* Create Superset dashboards for visualization of the different datasets

You can see the deployed products as well as their relationship in the following diagram:

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/overview.png[]

== Apache iceberg
As Apache iceberg states on their https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/[website]:

> Apache Iceberg is an open table format for huge analytic datasets. Iceberg adds tables to compute engines including Spark, Trino, PrestoDB, Flink, Hive and Impala using a high-performance table format that works just like a SQL table.

> This demos uses Iceberg as it plays along nicely with Object storages as well as having a Trino and Spark integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This demos uses Iceberg as it plays along nicely with object storage as well as having a Trino and Spark integration.
```

                                                                                                                                
 trino      trino         default    coordinator-metrics 212.227.224.138:30610                                                  
                                     coordinator-https   https://212.227.224.138:30876                                          
                                                                                                                                
 zookeeper  zookeeper     default    zk                  212.227.224.138:32321                                                  
                                                                                                                                
 minio      minio         default    http                http://217.160.222.211:32031   Third party service                     
                                     console-http        http://217.160.222.211:31429   Admin user: admin, password: adminadmin 
----

[NOTE]
====
When a product instance has not finished starting yet, the service will have no endpoint.

> Starting all of the product instances might take a considerable amount of time depending on your internet connectivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting all the product instances might take a considerable amount of time depending on your internet connectivity.
```

In case the product is not ready yet a warning might be shown.
====

== MinIO
=== List buckets
The S3 provided by MinIO is used as persistent storage to store all the data used.
Open the `minio` endpoint `console-http` retrieved by `stackablectl services list` in your browser (http://217.160.222.211:31429 in this case).

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/minio_1.png[]

Log in with the username `admin` and password `adminadmin`.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/minio_2.png[]

> Here you can see the two buckets the S3 is split into:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can see the two buckets contained in the S3:
```

> 1. `staging`: The demo loads static datasets into this area. It is stored in different formats, such as csv and parquet. It does contain actual data tables as well as lookup tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `staging`: The demo loads static datasets into this area. It is stored in different formats, such as CSV and Parquet. It does contain actual data tables as well as lookup tables.
```

2. `warehouse`: This bucket is where the cleaned and/or aggregated data resides. The data is stored in the https://iceberg.apache.org/[Apache Iceberg] table format.

=== Inspect warehouse
Click on the blue button `Browse` on the bucket `warehouse`.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/minio_3.png[]

You can see multiple folders (called prefixes in S3) - each containing a different dataset.

Click on the folders `house-sales` afterwards the folder starting with `house-sales-*` afterwards 'data'.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/minio_4.png[]

As you can see the table `house-sales` is partitioned by day.
Go ahead and click on any folder.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/minio_5.png[]

You can see that Trino has placed a single file here containing all the house sales of that particular year.

== NiFi

NiFi is used to fetch multiple datasources from the internet and ingest it into Kafka near-realtime.

> Some of the datasources are statically download (e.g. as csv) and others are fetch via APIs such as REST APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some data sources are statically downloaded (e.g. as CSV) and others are dynamically fetched via APIs such as REST APIs.
```

> This includes the following datasources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes the following data sources:
```

* https://mobidata-bw.de/dataset/bikesh[Shared bikes in Germany] (real-time)
* https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/price-paid-data-downloads[House sales in UK] (static)
* https://www.usgs.gov/programs/earthquake-hazards/earthquakes[Registered earthquakes worldwide] (static)
* https://mobidata-bw.de/dataset/e-ladesaulen[E-charging stations in Germany] (static)
* https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page[NewYork taxi data] (static)

=== View ingestion jobs
You can have a look at the ingestion job running in NiFi by opening the given `nifi` endpoint `https` from your `stackablectl services list` command output (https://217.160.120.117:31499 in this case).
If you get a warning regarding the self-signed certificate generated by the xref:secret-operator::index.adoc[Secret Operator] (e.g. `Warning: Potential Security Risk Ahead`), you have to tell your browser to trust the website and continue.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/nifi_1.png[]

Log in with the username `admin` and password `adminadmin`.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/nifi_2.png[]

> As you can see, the NiFi workflow consists of lot's of components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, the NiFi workflow consists of lots of components.
```

You can zoom in by using your mouse and mouse wheel.
On the left side are two strands, that

> 1. Fetch the list of known water-level stations and ingests them into Kafka

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Fetch the list of known water-level stations and ingest them into Kafka
```

> 2. Continuously run a loop fetching the measurements of the last 30 for every measuring stations and ingesting the measurements into Kafka

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Continuously run a loop fetching the measurements of the last 30 for every measuring station and ingesting the measurements into Kafka
```

On the right side are three strands, that

> 1. Fetch the current shred bike stations information
> 2. Fetch the current shred bike stations status
> 3. Fetch the current shred bike bike status

Reviewer: bike bike status :) ?
```suggestion
1. Fetch the current shared bike stations information
2. Fetch the current shared bike stations status
3. Fetch the current shared bike bike status
```

----

Afterwards you can reach the Webinterface on http://localhost:4040.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/spark_1.png[]

On the UI the last jobs are shown.
Each running Structured Streaming job creates lots of Spark jobs internally.

Click on the tab `Structured Streaming` to see the running streaming jobs.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/spark_2.png[]

Five streaming jobs are currently running.
The job with the highest throughput is the `ingest water_level measurements` job.
Click on the bluely highlighted `Run ID` of it.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/spark_3.png[]

== Trino
Trino is used to enable SQL access to the data.

=== View WebUI
Open up the the given `trino` endpoint `coordinator-https` from your `stackablectl services list` command output (https://212.227.224.138:30876 in this case).

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/trino_1.png[]

Log in with the username `admin` and password `admin`.

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/trino_2.png[]

=== Connect with DBeaver
https://dbeaver.io/[DBeaver] is free multi-platform database tool that can be used to connect to Trino.

> Please have a look at the <TODO> trino-operator documentation on how to connect DBeaver to Trino.

Author: Extracted into https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/issues/321

> Please have a look at the <TODO> trino-operator documentation on how to connect DBeaver to Trino.

Reviewer: We should create a ticket for that once its done to adapt it here?

> Please have a look at the <TODO> trino-operator documentation on how to connect DBeaver to Trino.

Author: Its in the definition of done in that ticket ;)

> Please have a look at the <TODO> trino-operator documentation on how to connect DBeaver to Trino.

Reviewer: OK

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/dbeaver_1.png[]

image::demo-data-warehouse-iceberg-trino-spark/dbeaver_2.png[]
You need to modify the setting `TLS` to `true`.

> Additionally no need to add the setting `SSLVerification` and set it to `NONE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, set `SSLVerification` to `NONE`.
```

Author: This actually is a 2-step process. First adding, later setting the value

Author: Arghhhh, nevermind. Setting it to

Additionally, you need to add the setting `SSLVerification` and set it to `NONE`
